# Public Health: research workflow and bottlenecks

Research in the Public Health sphere is necessary for humanity to stay alive and resist crises and pandemics. Nowadays, threats begin to act faster than any possible reaction of the existing system. To win the game, we need to make the research more effective. Let us see what weaknesses the process has and how we can fix it in the decentralized environment.

Research workflow in the PH sphere: what’s specific
The PH research workflow is a complicated process going through several stages. At first, we must see the problem, make the proper research design, then find money and collaboration, collect data and analyze it, then make a description and share it with the colleagues, getting expert assessment from them. 



There are different research types with various workflows. Nevertheless, all research workflows in the PH sphere have something in common. That is where problem issues are.

Current awareness and research design problems

All the PH issues go through several consequent steps which demand different types of research. Any topic can be considered properly studied only when the problem moves through all the four steps of research. Each step demands for its particular type of research, and each has its particular problems.
 

The first step is understanding the problem. This is when some new important issue is first time brought up to the public's attention. The research helps society to “see” it and describes the nature of its influence on PH. And the more “famous” the problem is, the more research is done on it.. Other important things may stay in the shadows for a long time till some scientist notices them. 

For example, here is the research on the health effects of transportation noise which appears to be the second most important environmental health hazard in Europe, just after air pollution, while awareness on the topic is still limited. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30321849/ To discover such issues, the researcher must have the opportunity to choose the topic or the research apart from the institution, and this is the first bottleneck of the PH workflow. 

The second step is testing for efficacy or the assessment of the relationship between existing interventions and their outcomes. It is necessary for describing and estimating how different methods influence the problem. For example, it can be the research on the impact of methadone maintenance treatment on HIV Risk Behaviors among High-Risk Injection Drug Users.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4824190/

The third step is testing for replicability, when the intervention is tested on new populations or settings in real-time. In such research the scientists assess how the culture of a certain community of people changes the effectiveness of a certain method of coping with the problem. We saw it many times when talking about anti-COVID measures including social distancing and wearing masks, like, for example, in this study of a real Brazilian context. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7237386/ 

The fourth step is testing for widespread dissemination and adoption of intervention in communities. Does the method work in various real-life conditions, is it replicable, can it be implemented, adapted in various circumstances and transformed into a PH practice? For example, here is the research on the effectiveness of community-based peer support for mothers to improve their breastfeeding practices. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28510603/


On each step there can be difficulties:



PH issue handling steps
Problems on each step
1
recognizing the problem
more research is done on already well-known topics, so it’s hard to see new issues
2
testing for efficacy
research topics are chosen not cause they’re important but rather of other reasons: what’s easier to fund, safer to publish etc
3
testing for replicability
negative results are published reluctantly, so there might be a lack of proof that some intervention is not efficient
4
testing for global adoption
data sharing and collaboration are not efficient enough due to political and infrastructural reasons



-In the first step there are “fashionable” and “less fashionable” research, so many vital problems stay undiscovered for a long time;
-In the second and third steps many researchers admit that their topics were chosen not out of the community’s need, but out of other reasons, like their research advisor’s area of scientific interest, or the opportunity to get financing;
-The third and fourth steps need a lot of resources, e.g. data and collaboration, which is why many problems do not move to steps 3 and 4. 

Funding issues

Financing is a very important part of the HP research workflow. There is expensive research in HP that needs many funds to accumulate. Besides, not all money is good money: you have to carefully watch not to create conflicts of interest. 

In developing countries, PH research budgeting is insufficient or inadequately executed. “The budgets are traditionally set every year and there is not any specific plan for spending budget lines. These funds and budgets are allocated routinely and it is not monitored”, - respondents say in the Iranian study on local PH research problems. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4796402/

In the Nigerian study, nearly all respondents, 536 (96.6%), had used their funds to carry out their research. However, only 33 (5.9%) and 23 (4.1%) had been awarded either a local sponsorship or an international grant. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7688027/

On the other hand, communication between a fund and a researcher is often inadequate. In India, in a study made by Public Health Research Initiative (PHRI) grant management, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S277265332200020X
most grant holders reported that they needed to do a lot of paperwork with the parent institute in releasing the grants. Sometimes there are problems with proper financing planning: researchers tended to submit a budget on the higher side, while only four of 35 projects managed to use all the funding as proposed. They either asked for additional funds (on high-end equipment, traveling, etc.), and failed to use all the money as approved. Grant management does not understand exactly how much money the research demands, and the researchers ask for more to keep on the safe side. The result is ineffective funds spending or lack of financing.
Therefore, to meet money and PH researchers in a proper way, we need a lot of open communication between them, and common goals to achieve. 

Research collaboration and data collection

The workflow in PH research is highly dependent on data, but their collecting, storing, and sharing is a hard job. There are various problems with data collection in different countries. For example, in Iran, much data is confidential due to military issues in the region. In Russia, there are no official regulations that could make people hide information, but when it comes to data collection, state hospitals refuse to give anything. 
Here is a fresh example of Artemy Okhotin, the author of the vaccine research https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36217139/, who tried to collect data for his case-control study:
“We addressed three state hospitals, but all Chief Physicians answered that it is a political question that should be put on hold. We managed to find data only in private computer tomography centers. That was one-third of the planned amount of our research: we could not find any data for hospitalized patients and people in ICU and had to work only with ambulant cases. 
The other problem is that hospitals collect purely administrative information, and for approaching clinical data you have to look through paper case records. To compare our findings with the vaccination coverage, we had to use an accidental seepage of information. 
One of our conclusions was that “EpiVacCorona use in population-based vaccination should be halted until effectiveness and efficacy evidence is provided”, while doctors often proposed EpiVacCorona for most vulnerable patients in risk groups as a “mild vaccine”.
So, once again, the important result was gathered despite, not thanks to, official sources of information; a typical situation for most highly motivated PH researchers in developing countries.

Problems with sharing the results

In the “publish or perish” world, researchers often note that peer reviewers pay attention more to the academic degrees of their supervisors than to the content of the proposal and the problem it solves. Therefore, PH research has more chances to be published if it has famous supervisors, which makes barriers to the publication of research by relatively unknown scientists. 
Sharing the results in a community is a necessary part of any HP research workflow. The more uninvolved specialists see and assess the proposal, the better and the safer the data will be, and in the PH sphere safety is crucial like nowhere else. 
Besides, not infrequently, to make themselves noticeable, researchers pick the themes with the biggest potential of hype not meeting the most vital community needs (and here we come back to the problem of current awareness). Negative results are rarely published, even if the study is high-quality. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6412619/ But the null result is also useful because it can tell others in the community which path is wrong, and save their time, money, and effort.
There are also difficulties with reviewing articles, because scientists have to do it for free, and those who don’t have much weight in the hierarchy, have to struggle to receive an estimation.

What does Decentralized Science do to address these problems 

We desire that researchers could be brave in spotting vital problems and that they could possess all possible means to solve them. There are various ways to fight these problems, among them decentralization initiatives in PH.That is what it means in terms of the aforesaid bottlenecks we identified.


Current awareness and research design problems
To make real shifts in PH, we need more intervention replication and dissemination studies across the globe. DeSci provides new opportunities to adapt intervention research that had already been carried on in other parts of the world or/and in other communities. Everybody in the DAO community can look at the existing initiatives and collaborate with them.

Funding issues
A decentralized environment provides new instruments of money accumulation and allocation, which makes small or remote initiatives interesting to investors. The members of the community can vote directly for the research proposal they love, and that brings funding to it. Therefore, every member of the community has the opportunity to participate in the initiative through intellectual property ownership. Allocated tokens could be used as a fund for research. Thus, a decentralized network provides transparent and independent means for research sustainability.
DAOs also address the problem of systematic errors which can make financing ineffective. Through a transparent review process, the science community will have more chances to avoid mistakes in the early stages of the research planning and correct them in time. 

Data issues
In a centralized world, even large research centers struggle to support repositories where big data should be stored and processed. The National Cancer Institute’s Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) based in the USA faced difficulties while receiving and storing large amounts of data from the cancer research community. Although it coped with these difficulties the challenge of centralization appeared significant. Decentralization may provide faster movement of data and easier access to it. That will allow more researchers an opportunity to analyze data, use better technology, and produce more insights for precise and quick performance of interventions.

Sharing the results
For the sake of being open and effective, PH research must escape from the “publish or perish” world of publishing in peer-reviewed journals. In the open science world, there are alternative reputation instruments coming instead of traditional hierarchy-based reputational instruments like the h-index. For example, our Jocelyn DAO works with Commit-Fungible Tokens or CFTs. Each significant action, be it a pull request of a study proposal, reviewing a resume, or the commitment to research results, will bring tokens to the active members of the community. We also call this an evidence-on-chain.
It is also important that the review process in the DeSci environment provides equity and gets rid of any censorship. Every result, be it “unimportant” or “non-significant”, “too resonant” or “unexpected”, has equal chances to be reviewed and assessed. 

Our Jocelyn DAO is the first DAO dealing with PH research. We are the ambassadors of network science, with its democracy and transparency. If you have your own story of conducting PH research, don’t hesitate to tell us about the problems you met on your way! We will collect your stories and publish them to identify and better solve PH research issues. 
We call all scientists, doctors, patients, and enthusiasts to become part of our social media:
https://medium.com/@phs_dao
https://www.linkedin.com/company/desci-gosh
https://twitter.com/phs_dao
https://t.me/desci_gosh
For all questions or offers, contact the founder of the Jocelyne DAO Oksana Stanevich oksana.stanevich@gosh.sh
